Machine Learning Enabled Novel Discovery for PFAS Degradation
Research team: PI: Romy Chakraborty CoIs: Mingfei Chen, Marcin Joachimiak, 
Background: 
Long-term applications of AFFF (Aqueous Film-Forming Foam) by the Department of Defense (DoD) at military fire-training sites have resulted in per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs)-contaminated groundwater, sediment, and soil far exceeding EPA health advisories 1.  PFAS, also known as “forever chemicals”, are also used for production of nonstick cookware, clothing, food packaging, carpets,  and a myriad of other products due to the inherent low surface tension and wetting properties1 , and fire retardant properties.  PFAS are characterized by the presence of carbon-fluorine bonds, that confer thermal and chemical stability to these compounds- the prime reason for their recalcitrance in different ecosystems. As of November 2024, PFAS contamination affects at least 8,865 locations across all 50 states, and it is a national priority to develop and implement strategies to protect the public and the environment from PFAS exposure. These chemicals accumulate in living tissues, leading to widespread health disorders (certain cancers, developmental defects, decreased reproductive fertility, and a diminished immune response2). 
Currently, their removal is practiced through activated carbon adsorption, filtration, reverse osmosis or ion exchange techniques. However, these methods have significant drawbacks3,4 of high costs and operational impracticalities, energy intensive infrastructure needs and the generation of toxic wastes and byproducts (such as hydrofluoric acid, fluoride), rendering them expensive and unsustainable. Further, several of these methods often simply sequester PFAS, necessitating an additional step of photocatalysis, electrochemical oxidation or high temperature incineration to completely degrade and remove PFAS from the environment- adding to overall energy costs of PFAS removal5. Microbial degradation of these compounds is sustainable, but challenging due to the energetic demands of C-F bond cleavage, difficulties in PFAS transport and catabolism, and the toxic effects of fluoride ion release and accumulation6–8. There are some reports on partial biotransformation of these compounds9–13, and, due to the complexity of the chemical structures, it is highly unlikely that scalable biotransformation can be efficiently executed by a single strain.
Selection of microbes for such biotransformation purposes has been performed more or less on an ad hoc basis thus far14,15. The commonly used approaches include development of enrichment cultures for the metabolism of interest through multiple passages or combining several microbial strains and expecting those to function synergistically through onerous time-consuming trial-and-error testing. For transformative solutions, it is essential to develop novel, accurate and fast methods for generating microbial consortia in an automated, high-throughput, and precise manner, enabling more informed and systematic approaches. We posit that PFAS can be efficiently degraded by judiciously designed microbial consortia, bypassing the need for energy intensive physico-chemical catalysis steps.
Machine learning (ML) is a powerful approach for processing and analyzing large, multidimensional datasets, uncovering and helping interpret complex data patterns, and training models to predict sophisticated biological outcomes. ML is gaining traction in microbiology for predicting drug targets, identifying and diagnosing pathogenic microbes, and revealing studying microbial interactions 16.  For this proposal, the transformative potential of ML lies in predicting emergent microbial community properties, optimizing functional repertoires to achieve desired outcomes, and enabling automated, high-throughput, and precise approaches. 
However, there is currently a disconnect between these advanced computational methods and laboratory experimentation, in that experimental approaches are generally not coupled with results and insights from ML methods and the available data. We are proposing to close this gap by using ML to identify key functional features for efficient PFAS degradation from all available microbial datasets (sequencing, metabolomics) to identify and select microbes capable of PFAS degradation. Using this ML approach is a significant improvement over conducting traditional expert-informed, trial-and-error microbial enrichments and isolations with the goal of identifying microbes and communities with specific biodegradation traits. Through this LDRD, we propose pioneering the development of a framework that leverages ML to intelligently design optimal microbial consortia for PFAS degradation, which is extendable to other applications of microbes for environmental resilience, sustainable agriculture etc.  This innovative approach represents a significant leap forward beyond the constraints of traditional microbial techniques, offering the potential for improved speed, efficacy, and efficiency in addressing PFAS contamination and other important biochemical problems.
Motivation and Objective: 
This proposal outlines two primary objectives: 
(1) Employ ML for creating a curated database of potential PFAS-degrading microorganisms and communities from all sequence-based data (shotgun metagenomes, genomes, and amplicon sequences), including environmental metadata where available, together with knowledge extracted from the literature. Target organisms and communities will be identified  using ML algorithms and on patterns of metagenome and function co-occurrence, in the context of metabolic potential that collectively can contribute to degradation of PFAS. 
(2) Construct microbial consortia optimized for specific function (PFAS degradation) using methods  from Objective 1. We propose to construct robust, stable microbial consortia with a robust suite of traits required to degrade PFAS into innocuous chemical products. We anticipate developing multiple consortia based on the desirable traits, and will down select five most effective PFAS-degrading consortia to initially degrade two types of PFAS compounds (one perfluorinated and one polyfluorinated) through processes described below (Fig1).

Fig1. Overview of the Integrated Approach: Aim 1 involves applying ML techniques (KG-Microbe) for PFAS biodegradation feature identification, leading to strain selection and community design. Aim 2 focuses on constructing and screening consortia, with the top 53 consortia undergoing in-depth PFAS pathway analysis.

Approach:
Aim 1: Building an ML-Powered Database for Identifying PFAS Biodegradation Genes and Microbes
We will construct a semantically-aware database with an comprehensive inventory of putative reactions, pathways, genes, taxa, environments, and communities responsible for different steps of polyfluorinated and perfluorinated compound -precursor biotransformation and biodegradation as well as related biological processes (e.g. fluoride resistance), using advanced ML techniques embodied in the KG-Microbe platform17, including knowledge extraction, graph learning, and link prediction. KG-Microbe includes a comprehensive microbe-centric knowledge graph (KG)  large language models (LLMs) to semantically extract and standardize microbial data with ontologies. enabling predictive modeling and rich analysis of microbial traits and interactions. We will integrate annotated genomes and metagenomes with putative PFAS biodegradation features into KG-Microbe for training graph and tabular learning models18 for the prediction of taxa and function associations with PFAS biodegradation and key related biological processes, and to prioritize community members and suggest community designs. The training data, sourced from data and representations in the new database as well as from KG-Microbe, will encompass various putative taxonomic groups with known and potential links to polyfluorinated and perfluorinated compound biodegradation such as: (1) microbes known for different steps in PFAS biodegradation; (2) dechlorinating microbes possessing dehalogenase, with a potential to cleave the C-F bond due to the structural similarity between fluoride and chloride ions; (3) fluoride-resistant microbes that possess specific genes and transport systems and/or extracellular reactive oxygen species, crucial for surviving high fluoride stress; (4) hydrocarbon-degrading microbes, pertinent for cleaving further carbon-carbon bonds, tolerance and transport of hydrophobic aromatics into cells; (5) microbes from known PFAS-contaminated sites; (6) patterns of microbial co-occurrence combined with environmental variables pertinent to PFAS; and (7) other candidate organisms which share high similarity to organisms (1-6). These different subsets of training data, supported by a standardized vocabulary and relationships, will be treated initially as distinct cases but as we learn the underlying important predictive features, the data will be merged and split to best represent the available knowledge and maximize the training data outcomes. To refine our model further, we will incorporate negative control groups, such as microbes from pristine environments or human pathogens, to filter out general housekeeping genes irrelevant to PFAS biodegradation. We will also perform dynamic refinement of feature selection based on environmental metagenomic data to ensure only relevant biodegradation markers and co-existing taxa are emphasized19. To gain biological insights that can help inform our approach and refine methods, important features from these models as well as experimental outcomes will be interpreted using LLM-assistance 20 and machine reading of literature. We will also consider LLMs for additional computational validation and critique of community designs, to help prioritize and select best candidates and next steps.
	In parallel, we will train a second model to use microbial community features to predict PFAS degradation outcomes and to learn PFAS degradation community design rules. This model will use all annotations of community members, as well as properties of that community such as growth conditions (pH, temperature, oxic/anoxic), relative abundance, OD, or chemical measurements, along with PFAS degradation experimental outcomes as training data. We will use this model to expand and scale community design by 1) dynamically incorporating new experimental results and 2) testing synthetic community designs relative to our understanding of communities and microbial features in relation to PFAS degradation, including interpretations with LLM-assistance.
For validation, we will employ a withheld subset of our data to computationally test the model’s predictions against known outcomes, ensuring its accuracy and reliability in identifying PFAS biodegradation potentials. We will also incorporate Aim 2’s functional and taxonomic findings into iterative ML model training and validation. This will support creating a detailed, searchable database of both known, e.g. extracted from literature with LLM-assistance, and potential PFAS biodegrading enzymes and microbes. This database aims to be a foundational resource for researchers and environmental practitioners alike, facilitating the identification and application of effective biodegradation solutions for PFAS-contaminated environments.

Aim 2: Developing Optimized Microbial Consortia for Efficient PFAS Biodegradation
Following the identification of critical features linked to PFAS biodegradation from Aim 1, we will first mine through our extensive and unique in-house collection of approximately 5000 environmental isolates to select strains (or closest ASV matches) that exhibit the highest concurrence with the identified key features. Our collection already includes strains for polyaromatic hydrocarbon sensing and degradation, fluoride tolerance, and if needed, we will supplement with strains from standard culture collections such as ATCC. We will categorize the top 100 strains with most ‘key’ features into different groups involved in various PFAS biodegradation steps (such as C-F bond cleavage, F export and tolerance, hydrocarbon degradation), feeding the results back into the PFAS Microbial Association Database (PFASMAD). This approach will help us understand both individual and collective degradation capacities, enabling the assembly of ML-guided microbial consortia bearing the different synergistic traits for effective PFAS degradation. We will include metadata of the genomes, amplicon sequences, or metagenome-associated genomes (MAGs) to identify the environmental properties (e.g. terms describing temperature, salinity, pH, trophic status, etc.) that will help further guide the refinement stable consortia development eliminating  microbe-microbe interactions21. We plan to create 10-15 microbial consortia (average of 3-5 microbial members per consortium) that will be tested for PFAS breakdown using growth assays as well as extracellular release and accumulation of fluoride concentration as outputs. We do not expect microbial growth to be significant under these conditions and will measure active cell counts values pre- and post-incubations. For 5 selected microbial consortia with most convincing release of fluoride, we will proceed to perform degradation tests of both PFAS polyfluorinated and perfluorinated compounds, using a suite of analytical techniques (total organic carbon assessment, ultra-high precision liquid chromatography, active cell counts and fluoride measurements). PFAS analysis is non-trivial and requires specific analytical tools. We have identified and communicated with Cyclopure for the measurements. Five consortia demonstrating optimal performance will eventually undergo further optimization, detailed analysis to identify key degradation products, functional genes, in order to further fine-tune our ML models and databases for enhanced performance.

Expected Outcome: We expect to have three major outcomes from this proposed research:
Creation of a comprehensive PFAS biodegradation database using ML
Development of a novel pipeline that systematically combines iterative computation and experimentation for optimized microbial consortia with targeted functional capabilities
Assembly of five microbial consortia with propensity for both polyfluorinated and perfluorinated compound degradation with high efficiency

References:
1.    Podder, A., Sadmani, A.H.M.A., Reinhart, D., Chang, N.-B., and Goel, R. (2021). Per and poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) as a contaminant of emerging concern in surface water: A transboundary review of their occurrences and toxicity effects. J. Hazard. Mater. 419, 126361. 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126361.
2.    Fenton, S.E., Ducatman, A., Boobis, A., DeWitt, J.C., Lau, C., Ng, C., Smith, J.S., and Roberts, S.M. (2021). Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substance Toxicity and Human Health Review: Current State of Knowledge and Strategies for Informing Future Research. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 40, 606–630. 10.1002/etc.4890.
3.    Gar Alalm, M., and Boffito, D.C. (2022). Mechanisms and pathways of PFAS degradation by advanced oxidation and reduction processes: A critical review. Chemical Engineering Journal 450, 138352. 10.1016/j.cej.2022.138352.
4.    Dixit, F., Dutta, R., Barbeau, B., Berube, P., and Mohseni, M. (2021). PFAS removal by ion exchange resins: A review. Chemosphere 272, 129777. 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.129777.
5.    Meegoda, J.N., Bezerra de Souza, B., Casarini, M.M., and Kewalramani, J.A. (2022). A review of PFAS destruction technologies. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 19. 10.3390/ijerph192416397.
6.    Wackett, L.P. (2021). Why is the biodegradation of polyfluorinated compounds so rare? mSphere 6, e0072121. 10.1128/mSphere.00721-21.
7.    Ochoa-Herrera, V., Banihani, Q., León, G., Khatri, C., Field, J.A., and Sierra-Alvarez, R. (2009). Toxicity of fluoride to microorganisms in biological wastewater treatment systems. Water Res. 43, 3177–3186. 10.1016/j.watres.2009.04.032.
8.    Zhang, C., Yan, K., Fu, C., Peng, H., Hawker, C.J., and Whittaker, A.K. (2022). Biological Utility of Fluorinated Compounds: from Materials Design to Molecular Imaging, Therapeutics and Environmental Remediation. Chem. Rev. 122, 167–208. 10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00632.
9.    Ruyle, B.J., Thackray, C.P., McCord, J.P., Strynar, M.J., Mauge-Lewis, K.A., Fenton, S.E., and Sunderland, E.M. (2021). Reconstructing the Composition of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Contemporary Aqueous Film-Forming Foams. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 8, 59–65. 10.1021/acs.estlett.0c00798.
10.   D’Agostino, L.A., and Mabury, S.A. (2014). Identification of novel fluorinated surfactants in aqueous film forming foams and commercial surfactant concentrates. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 121–129. 10.1021/es403729e.
11.   Place, B.J., and Field, J.A. (2012). Identification of novel fluorochemicals in aqueous film-forming foams used by the US military. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 7120–7127. 10.1021/es301465n.
12.   Backe, W.J., Day, T.C., and Field, J.A. (2013). Zwitterionic, cationic, and anionic fluorinated chemicals in aqueous film forming foam formulations and groundwater from U.S. military bases by nonaqueous large-volume injection HPLC-MS/MS. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 5226–5234. 10.1021/es3034999.
13.   Barzen-Hanson, K.A., Roberts, S.C., Choyke, S., Oetjen, K., McAlees, A., Riddell, N., McCrindle, R., Ferguson, P.L., Higgins, C.P., and Field, J.A. (2017). Discovery of 40 Classes of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Historical Aqueous Film-Forming Foams (AFFFs) and AFFF-Impacted Groundwater. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 2047–2057. 10.1021/acs.est.6b05843.
14.   Jing, J., Garbeva, P., Raaijmakers, J.M., and Medema, M.H. (2024). Strategies for tailoring functional microbial synthetic communities. ISME J. 18. 10.1093/ismejo/wrae049.
15.   Chen, M., Yee, M.O., Acharya, S.M., Cabugao, K.G., and Chakraborty, R. (2024). Developing Stable, Simplified, Functional Consortia from Brachypodium Rhizosphere for Microbial Application in Sustainable Agriculture. Frontiers in Microbiology.
16.   Goodswen, S.J., Barratt, J.L.N., Kennedy, P.J., Kaufer, A., Calarco, L., and Ellis, J.T. (2021). Machine learning and applications in microbiology. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 45. 10.1093/femsre/fuab015.
17.   Joachimiak, M.P., Hegde, H., Duncan, W.D., Reese, J.T., Cappelletti, L., Thessen, A.E., and Mungall, C.J. (2021). KG-Microbe: A Reference Knowledge-Graph and Platform for Harmonized Microbial Information. ICBO, 131.
18.   Cappelletti, L., Fontana, T., Casiraghi, E., Ravanmehr, V., Callahan, T.J., Cano, C., Joachimiak, M.P., Mungall, C.J., Robinson, P.N., Reese, J., et al. (2023). GRAPE for fast and scalable graph processing and random-walk-based embedding. Nat. Comput. Sci. 3, 552–568. 10.1038/s43588-023-00465-8.
19.   Liu, B., Sträuber, H., Saraiva, J., Harms, H., Silva, S.G., Kasmanas, J.C., Kleinsteuber, S., and Nunes da Rocha, U. (2022). Machine learning-assisted identification of bioindicators predicts medium-chain carboxylate production performance of an anaerobic mixed culture. Microbiome 10, 48. 10.1186/s40168-021-01219-2.
20.   Joachimiak, M.P., Caufield, J.H., Harris, N.L., Kim, H., and Mungall, C.J. (2024). Gene set summarization using large language models. arXiv. 10.48550/arxiv.2305.13338.
21.   Li, C., Lim, K.M.K., Chng, K.R., and Nagarajan, N. (2016). Predicting microbial interactions through computational approaches. Methods 102, 12–19. 10.1016/j.ymeth.2016.02.019. 
